Khang.truong/add alert aggregation guide (#27867)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/monitors/guide/alert_aggregation.md

Let's take this example:

{{< img src="/monitors/guide/alert_aggregation/monitor_query_multi_alert.png" alt="Example monitor query grouped by topic and partition" style="width:100%;" >}}

### Simple Alert

A Simple Alert monitor is a monitor that will aggregate your alerts into a single unique alert.
{{< img src="monitors/guide/alert_aggregation/simple_alert_notification.png" alt="Notification configuration for a simple alert monitor" style="width:100%;" >}}

Using the example, no matter which topic or partition breaches the threshold the monitor will alert. All notifications are aggregated into one single alert.

For more information, see [Configure Monitors - Simple alert][1].

### Multi Alert

A Multi Alert monitor is a monitor that triggers for each unique combination of groups.  
{{< img src="/monitors/guide/alert_aggregation/multi_alert_notification.png" alt="Notification configuration for a multi alert monitor" style="width:100%;" >}}
In our case, the monitor will send a notification each time a combination of topic and partition breaches the threshold.  

> When using Multi Alert, using [Variables][2] become very useful to get more granularity in your notifications. They help you get a specific message depending on the group that triggers the alert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With multi alert monitors, use [variables][2] to get more granularity in your notification. They help customize messages based on the specific group that triggers the alert.
```

For more information, see [Configure Monitors - Multi alert][3].

## Use cases

{{% collapse-content title="Simple Alert" level="h4" expanded=false %}}
#### Scenario

> You're monitoring a Kafka-based logging system with "error-logs" and "user-events". If any partition gets a message lag of more than 500, you want to know about it, but you don't need multiple alerts if multiple partitions are lagging.  

Reviewer: Are error-logs and user-events the group by attributes? What does partition mean here?

```suggestion
You're monitoring a Kafka-based logging system grouped by `error-logs` and `user-events`. If any partition gets a message lag of more than 500, you want to know about it, but you don't need multiple alerts if multiple partitions are lagging.  
```

#### Benefits of aggregation
This is useful for teams that don't want excessive notifications but still need to act when issues arise.  
However, if multiple partitions are lagging, you might not see every single affected partition in a single notification.

{{% /collapse-content %}}

{{% collapse-content title="Multi Alert" level="h4" expanded=false %}}

> Multi Alerts are great when a service is owned by multiple teams (e.g. each team is responsible for a dedicated component). Depending on which component is causing an issue, a different team should be notified.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Multi alerts are great for when a service is owned by multiple teams (each team is responsible for a dedicated component). Depending on which component is causing an issue, a different team should be notified.
```

#### Scenario

> You're running an e-commerce order processing system, and messages are sent to the "order-events" topic.  

Reviewer: Is the `order-events` a grouped by attribute? Or when you say sent to, is this a variable?

Author: you can say "order-events" is a value of the attribute "topic"

Reviewer: Could we clarify with

```suggestion
You're running an e-commerce order processing system, and messages are sent to the attribute value `topic:order-events`.  
```

  
#### Benefits of aggregation

> If multiple partitions lag (e.g., partition 1 and partition 3), you need separate alerts because different partitions might correspond to different types of orders (e.g., domestic vs. international).  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If multiple partitions lag (for example, partition 1 and partition 3), you need separate alerts because different partitions might correspond to different types of orders (such as domestic vs. international).  
```

This level of detail helps engineers respond quickly and with precision.

{{% /collapse-content %}}

> ## How to do this via API

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to do this with the API
```

If you are managing your monitors via the API, you want to use the variable "notify\_by" to make your monitor a Simple Alert or a Multi Alert.  

> To make the monitor a Simple Alert, you want to have "notify_by": [*].
> To make the monitor a Multi Alert, you want "notify_by": [<group>], for example: "notify_by": ["topic"].

Reviewer: A table of this might be easier to read

```suggestion
| Type of Alert     | Configuration Example                  |
|-------------------|----------------------------------------|
| Simple Alert      | `"notify_by": [*]`                     |
| Multi Alert       | `"notify_by": [<group>]`, e.g., `"notify_by": ["topic"]` |
```

---
title: Alert aggregation 
further_reading:
- link: "/monitors/configuration/?tab=thresholdalert#configure-notifications-and-automations"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Learn more about configuring notifications and automations"
- link: "/monitors/guide/monitor_aggregators/"
  tag: "Documentation"
  text: "Monitor Aggregators"
---

## Overview

> Ensuring system health and performance of requires timely and actionable notifications. However, effective alerts depend not only on timing, but also on the number of alerts generated. Alert aggregation is critical in managing this balance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ensuring system health and performance requires timely and actionable notifications. However, effective alerts depend not only on timing, but also on the number of alerts generated. Alert aggregation is critical in managing this balance.
```

The answer depends on your system's architecture, the nature of the issue, and your team's workflow. Understanding alert aggregations can help ensure teams are informed of issues without excess notifications. 

This guide explores various alert aggregation capabilities and strategies for different scenarios.

## Types of alert aggregation 

By default, Datadog sends an alert for each monitored group. However, you can choose to receive a single notification, regardless of how many monitored groups breach the threshold.

Consider this example, you have a monitor query grouped by multiple attributes, in this case the query is grouped by `topic` and `partition`.

{{< img src="/monitors/guide/alert_aggregation/monitor_query_multi_alert.png" alt="Example monitor query grouped by topic and partition" style="width:100%;" >}}

### Simple alert

A simple alert monitor aggregates your alerts into a single unique alert.
{{< img src="monitors/guide/alert_aggregation/simple_alert_notification.png" alt="Notification configuration for a simple alert monitor" style="width:100%;" >}}

> Using the example, no matter which topic or partition breaches the threshold, the monitor sends a single alert. All notifications are aggregated into one alert.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Using the example, no matter which `topic` or `partition` breaches the threshold, the monitor sends a single alert. All notifications are aggregated into one alert.
```

For more information, see [Configure Monitors - Simple alert][1].

### Multi alert

A multi alert monitor sends a notification for each unique combination of groups.  
{{< img src="/monitors/guide/alert_aggregation/multi_alert_notification.png" alt="Notification configuration for a multi alert monitor" style="width:100%;" >}}
Using the example, the monitor sends a notification each time a combination of `topic` and `partition` breaches the threshold.  
With multi alert monitors, use [variables][2] to get more granularity in your notification. They help customize messages based on the specific group that triggers the alert.

For more information, see [Configure Monitors - Multi alert][3].

## Use cases

{{% collapse-content title="Simple Alert" level="h4" expanded=false %}}
#### Scenario

> You're monitoring a Kafka-based logging system grouped by `error-logs` and `user-events`. If any partition gets a message lag of more than 500, you want to know about it, but you don't need multiple alerts if multiple partitions are lagging.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You're monitoring a Kafka-based logging system grouped by `topic:error-logs` and `topic:user-events`. If any partition gets a message lag of more than 500, you want to know about it, but you don't need multiple alerts if multiple partitions are lagging.  
```

Author: Same as previously mentioned :)

#### Benefits of aggregation

> This is useful for teams that don't want excessive notifications but still need to act when issues arise.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A simple alert is useful for teams that don't want excessive notifications but still need to act when issues arise.  
```

However, if multiple partitions are lagging, you might not see every single affected partition in a single notification.

{{% /collapse-content %}}

{{% collapse-content title="Multi Alert" level="h4" expanded=false %}}
Multi alerts are great for when a service is owned by multiple teams (each team is responsible for a dedicated component). Depending on which component is causing an issue, a different team should be notified.

#### Scenario
You're running an e-commerce order processing system, and messages are sent to the "order-events" topic.  
  
#### Benefits of aggregation
If multiple partitions lag (for example, partition 1 and partition 3), you need separate alerts because different partitions might correspond to different types of orders (such as domestic vs. international).  

This level of detail helps engineers respond quickly and with precision.

{{% /collapse-content %}}

## How to do this with the API

> If you are managing your monitors with the API, you want to use the variable `notify_by` to make your monitor a simple alert or a multi alert.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you are managing your monitors with the API, use the variable `notify_by` to make your monitor a simple alert or a multi alert.  
```
